# Bootloading Embedded Applications

Bootloading allows you to update application firmware images on your devices. This section provides background information about bootloading using the Silicon
Labs Gecko Bootloader.

- [**Bootloader Fundamentals**](/bluetooth/{build-docspace-version}/bootloader-fundamentals): Introduces bootloading for Silicon Labs networking devices. Discusses the Gecko Bootloader as well as legacy Ember and Bluetooth bootloaders, and describes the file formats used by each.
- [**Silicon Labs Gecko Bootloader User’s Guide for Series 3 and Higher**](/bluetooth/{build-docspace-version}/bootloader-user-guide-series3-and-higher): Describes the high-level implementation of the Silicon Labs Gecko Bootloader for Series 3 microcontrollers, SoCs (System on Chips), and NCPs (Network Co-Processors), and provides information on different aspects of configuring the Gecko Bootloader.
- [**Silicon Labs Gecko Bootloader User's Guide for GSDK 4.0 and Higher (series 1 and 2 devices)**](/bluetooth/{build-docspace-version}/bootloader-user-guide-gsdk-4): Describes the high-level implementation of the Silicon Labs Gecko Bootloader for EFR32 SoCs and NCPs, and provides information on how to get started using the Gecko Bootloader with Silicon Labs wireless protocol stacks in GSDK 4.0 and higher.
- [**Using the Gecko Bootloader with Silicon Labs Bluetooth Applications**](/bluetooth/{build-docspace-version}/using-gecko-bootloader-with-bluetooth-apps): Includes detailed information on using the Gecko Bootloader with Silicon Labs Bluetooth applications. It supplements the general Gecko Bootloader implementation information provided in the Gecko Bootloader User's Guide.
- [**Series 2 and Series 3 Secure Boot with RTSL**](/bluetooth/{build-docspace-version}/series2-secure-boot-with-rtsl): Describes the design of Secure Boot with RTSL (Root of Trust and Secure Loader) on Series 2 and Series 3 devices. It also provides examples of how to implement the Secure Boot process.
- [**Transitioning to the Updated Gecko Bootloader in GSDK 4.0 and Higher**](/bluetooth/{build-docspace-version}/bootloader-transitioning-guide-gsdk-v40-and-higher): Gecko Bootloader v2.x, introduced in GSDK 4.0, contains a number of changes compared to Gecko Bootloader v1.x. This document describes the differences between the versions, including how to configure the new Gecko Bootloader in Simplicity Studio 5.
